All right, everyone. I am super excited to be here with Michael I. Jordan, distinguished
professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and the Department
of Statistics at the University of California, Berkeley. Professor Jordan, welcome to the
Twimmel AI podcast. It's my pleasure to be here. It is super exciting for me to have you
on the show. You are connecting or we are connecting with you being in Italy right now.
And so, you know, folks, we might experience a little bit of delay, but wanted to, you
know, start by having you share a little bit about what brought you to Italy. Interesting
turn of events where Italy was a early hotspot for coronavirus, but now it sounds like things
are going pretty well in the country. Yeah, it's, there will be a bit of a delay, but
I hope that people will appreciate how amazing it is that we're talking across the ocean
right now and packets are flying back and forth and yeah, it's very, very striking.
My spouse is Italian and I have Italian passport, therefore. And so with the kids, we decided
we'd come to Italy about a mid-summer because it's, this is the eastern, far eastern
side of Italy and life is really quite open. So, restaurants are open. You can walk around
town and the kids can have a normal life. So, that's why we're here. We probably can't
stay much longer because I need to get back and start work back in Berkeley. But it is
an example of a country. Maybe it's because it's smaller and maybe because they had a
trauma early on, but people took it really, really seriously. And I think for about four
to six weeks, you really literally didn't go out of your apartment. It was the whole
bloody lockdown. And if you follow the trend, they really brought it down to near zero and
now it stays around a few hundred per day and they do the contact tracing and so on and
so forth. So, somehow they'd learned quickly that there's a few things to do that are
right. And I think it's taking everybody else a lot longer to get on board with the simple
but critical things to do to keep this thing in check.
That's amazing. That's amazing. Well, I'd love to start by hearing a little bit about
your career and how you know, how your interests in machine learning, our performance
solutions and all the other things that you work on began. In 2016, you were named one
of the most influential computer scientists worldwide. So, did you start out with that
in mind? No, I didn't. I'm glad that computer science somehow welcomed me in along the way
because I really had it in a different direction. I think I was influenced by philosophy.
There was a autobiography I read by Bertrand Russell when I was a kid that it's like three
volumes and he was sort of the early part of the century, last century thinking about the mind
and the brain and logic and thought and psychology and so on and so forth. And so that got me sort
of kind of aware that there could be a science emerging of the mind and aware that it had
something to do with their traditions and philosophy of inductive thinking and deductive
thinking and so on and so forth. But that was my vague awareness. I did not grow up with
particularly good education and I just, and I'm going to continue to this day, a little
less random. But I was intrigued by the idea that the big problems of our day had to do
with not just computers but with algorithms and with dealing with uncertainty in the
real world. So, computers, what I found missing in computers when I finally came to computer
science by the time I've been already in cognitive science and seeing kind of humans who
were thinking somewhat logically but not entirely. And it was intriguing to me how we can
be not logical but at the same time we're so powerful. And so computers didn't seem to
have that and it felt to me that computers needed to move out of the purely deductive world
that they'd gotten kind of focused on. So, when I, by the time I came to computer science
I was already interested in inference and in decision making and economic ideas and so
on so forth. But it really is kind of random walk and I like to say that I really like interacting
with students and helping them with career decisions and helping them think about what is
the future and where it's going and all that. Talking about that I think is really helpful
not just to me but for figuring out my next, my next steps which are always big and unsure
but especially for younger people to orient themselves in this kind of thicket of ideas.
That's awesome. So, your academic home at least at Berkeley is in the WCS and stats but
you've also done quite a bit of work in cognitive sciences and biology as well. Are you still
active in those communities? Yeah, I'm active in them less so right now my main focus is bringing
economic ideas together with inference and computer science. But even there, you find themes
that are familiar from past lives. So, in fact, economics is full of kind of busy and thinking
and where do the preferences come from and how do people approach economics problems,
how to actors, how to have agents behave and so on. So, you're in the world of cognitive
science to some degree. Biology was really just because again, it's the topic of the era.
And so, anybody who's living in this era who doesn't learn about molecular biology and
the immune system and cancer and whatnot, I don't think it's quite living the full
ethics life they could. Moreover, our field of data analysis and large scale data analysis,
in particular, obviously, had a lot of connections to what was happening in biology and I wanted
to kind of lend an ear and hear what was going on and see if I could contribute and that
continues. So, I've learned a bit about proteins, I've learned a bit about how enzymes work
and learn a bit about genomics and three-dimensional structure of genomics, something I'm currently
interested in and these are just kind of, that's almost more of an intellectual hobby, but my main
focus really is kind of learning algorithms and how they behave when you put them in real world
deployments and how they behave when there's large collections of people involved and where all
that's going. And you mentioned that one of your primary interests today is in the economic realm
and how that interplays with inference and other things in the ML and AI world,
elaborate a little bit on that. What's your thinking in direction there?
Yeah, so I never was really an AI person in the sense that it was never the main thing in my
life to have a computer replace a human being. That's kind of an interesting aspiration about
could that be possible? I don't think it's impossible. I do believe it's possible. I don't believe
it's going to happen in our lifetimes. Humans are just too amazingly rich, richly intelligent and
deep and broad and so on. That said, it's a fantastically interesting philosophical question.
But I was always more interested in more of the implications of algorithmic styles of thinking
and what that meant if you put it out there in the world. In other words, there was a whole new
infrastructure that links people like this network is linking us right now transmitting the bits.
But what if it was more aware in some sense or what if the bits are given economic value so
that we're actually some transactions are happening or that value is being recorded and created.
What if there's kind of a market happening behind the scenes here?
People are being connected in a way. What are the consequences of connecting all of us?
But not just connecting humans. What are the consequences of all the connections behind the scenes?
So if you think about just to be concrete like the current COVID, the coronavirus issues,
we're all reading as much as we can about it. But behind the scenes, there's this vast network
that involves doctors and people and researchers, but it also involves lots of data, lots of computers,
lots of measurements and put it in all together and then how many it flow
so just that the right ideas are present at the right time and the right decisions are being made
for the right people is a non-trivial exercise. And it's not even being treated as an exercise
usually. I think it's kind of all just ad hoc. We just do the best we can with what we got.
But think about the banking system just as a point of comparison. Think about the ATMs
that we all can now go around the world. This wasn't possible in my parents' generation.
We can go around the world and have a little card. We don't even need a card anymore.
Really, it's a cell phone. And our money is available to us anytime in any place and billions,
I don't know, maybe trillions of transactions are happening per day and they're not and they're
all correct. And even if the electricity goes out of the ATM machine, well I'm half with
through my transaction, no problem. If I take out money here and my wife takes out money
across the world, we don't get docked twice. So it's astonishing that it works and it really does.
And there's huge consequences if it didn't work. Our financial system could be endangered.
There's lots of criminals trying to make it not work and just all kinds of things like that.
So it's not perfect, but it's sort of amazing and has had a big impact.
And the current sort of medical response to COVID is nothing like that, right?
It's an ad hoc collection of things where maybe some doctor read something somewhere
and that triggered some thought. And that's fine. There's a lot of that going forward,
but it also would be nice if we wouldn't have so much loss of human life and heartache if
the right ideas were not kind of transmitted at the right times. And so looking back,
that will be more and more possible. Just like looking back, when people started to first
build electrical systems or chemical systems and factories and steam engines and all that,
eventually they got it right and it really was great. And it just did a lot of the
one things people. But along the way, it was really not great. And that's kind of where we are
right now. We're creating all kinds of artifacts, including social networks that just looked fun,
like fun. Let's just connect everybody up. It's easy, but it's turned out to not be so great.
In many ways, it's pretty damaging the human spirit, really. And so a field that builds those
systems should also be a field that's aware of the consequences of building that and able
to kind of steer it and, you know, or at least, you know, be transparent about what could happen and
let people avoid some of the bad consequences. We're not there.
But there's so much in there. Can you maybe give us a few examples of when you're thinking about
these large scale systems and applying kind of an economic lens to them? What are some of the
you know, specific questions that that prompts for you and how you investigate those?
Yeah. Yeah, let's listen to you be real concrete. I think that'll that'll really
help the conversation help me to kind of wrap up the things more clearly as possible.
So I'm my favorite example of these days, which if you've seen other podcasts with me,
to the audience, my apologies, or this is you've heard it before, but it has it with music. And
it has to do with kind of people who make music and people listen to music, right? And
and I was lucky enough to meet someone named Steve Stout, who who's a friend and he's a
an entrepreneur and he's also kind of been a music, you know, heavily involved in the music world.
The recent music world, let's say hip hop and Latin music and so on and so forth. So I got
to know him and he and I have kind of bounced thoughts back and forth. And so some of my thinking has
been influenced by Steve. There's a company that he has that I have been on the board of advisors.
It's called United Masters. And it has at latest, I think a few hundred thousand musicians
signed up. All right. So what is going on there? What is why are musicians signing it to a company?
Why do I find that interesting? Right. Well, music is a has economic value, right? And it should.
Why should it have you gone to value? Well, because people who make music should be out of a living
you know, have a job and be able to have a career, you know, making music. It shouldn't be doing
it just for fun or just for, you know, you know, it's not a job. In fact, people talk a lot about
missing job. So that's an example of something that shouldn't be a missing job. It should be a real
job. Sadly, at that market, that ability to have a job in a world like creating music doesn't
really exist. And this seems strange because there's studios all over the world. There's
there's your music flows everywhere. It's it's a, you know, so surely there is a very healthy
music market world. And the answer to the fact is there's not that there's a few people who
still make, you know, hundreds of millions of dollars. They were plucked out. They have talent,
but they were amplified then by a system that that that made them superstars.
And you would think that, well, that's just how life is, that everyone wants to listen to the
superstars. And they do listen to the superstars. And that's fine. And that's just, and then there's
a lot of other people that make money in some, some penumbra. But you'd be wrong about that. No one,
the fact is, if you look at the data that 95% of the music being listened to today was not made
by the superstars. It was made by people you never heard of. And 95% of the music that's been
listened to today was music done in the last two years. So these are kind of things that no one
knows. But it suggests there's a whole missing market. So who is, who's making music and who's
listening to it? Well, it's largely a cultural phenomenon. It's an intercity phenomenon. There's
lots of kids who laugh off and then make music. And there means often good enough that,
that they, you know, they stream it somewhere and it gets picked up on and they can actually
become popular. Popular enough that a lot of people will listen to them. And then they're the
cool people to listen to and that's who's actually listened to, you know, if you hang around younger
people. Yeah. Yeah. So, so in that just all great, well, no, this is sad story because those
kids who made that music, you know, within a year or two, they won't have a job, right? And they
really, this is, so, so what can you do to fix that? So now, in some sense, the AI or data science
comes into play, which is that every time someone's music is being streamed across these great networks
that we've built, some economic value should accompany that. And I don't mean micropayments. I mean
that if one of these kids is making a lot of music and, you know, hundreds of thousands of people,
not even millions are listening to them, they should be able to see on a dashboard at the end of
the week, who's listening to them? Where, where in the country? Here's a dot every time your music
was listened to, all right? And if they turn out to be popular in a particular city, they should be
able to tell the vineyarders and say, look, I'm popular there, let me come play in your city.
And we'll, we'll broadcast to the audience because I'm connected to the audience, right? I have
that data. And so the data is the currency of the realm here. The data says that I now know I'm
popular and I can prove to you I'm popular. And so I'll come give a show there and I'll make,
you know, $25,000. And if I do that three or four times a year, there's a salary right there.
All right. More over if I start to get connected to my fans, I can offer them to come backstage.
I can offer them to call, play your wedding for $20,000 or whatever. I can start to build a life
and a career, right? And it's now not some company that's doing this for me or some agent.
It's me. All right. I'm empowered to do this. All right. And I'm able to do this because of the
data flow and people like me paying attention to what the data is and how to get into the hands of
the people can act on it and helping to create a market where the producers are connected to the
consumers. Okay. So this company United Masters is doing a good chunk of that equation, which is
that it has signed up these young artists telling them don't sign with the record company,
signed with us. And we will help you that we will be the data scientist for you. We'll let you
have a record company in your pocket and we'll let you manage these things. Moreover, we will act
as an agent for all of you. So if you, you know, the NBA website now, if you go there and listen
to music there as you're watching the clips, it's these, it's these artists. So I get excited by
that because I see that a little bit of AI and data science, the building of a producer consumer
market paid into the long tail, the concern about the matching and the balancing, the use, you know,
game theoretic and mark, you know, matching principles, along with recommendations to the
principles, kind of all the guts of good machine learning systems. If you start to do that right,
you can actually create this thing as a healthy market. And I can see it, you know, very soon
within not just our lifetime, but the next year is kind of a million people in the U.S. being
involved in such a market with us being listened to and able monetize it, you know, all such
devices being sold around it and so on and so forth. And I can see not just in the U.S., I can see
Brazil, you know, China, et cetera, each having their own music systems. And I can see companies
emerging to support this. So in some cases, it all seems naive and easy and simple and why not,
of course, but you know, it's not been what IT has done. IT has created like search engines
or social networks, which are services that aim to, you know, provide connections among people.
But no one, it doesn't actually preserve economic value or create new economic value.
It just gives you data and then you have to monetize it with advertising. And so that's wrong.
I mean, it's limited and it's not wrong. It's just limited. And if instead you say, no, my job
as an IT person or AI person has created this system that is a real market and allows people to come
in and they participate in the way they choose. And I'm just going to run the system and make sure
that everybody gets connected up in the right way. And I'm going to do this at a brand new scale.
It's not going to be 10 people or 100 or 1000. It's going to be millions. And in doing so,
I'm like a real engineer. It's like a chemist who went from, you know, to take test tubes in the lab
who could then build a factory and tell you that that thing is going to work. And so as a field,
we started to orientals building that sort of thing, guarantee that it'll work, bringing in people,
ensuring transparency, ensuring the working system. I'm thinking about how to do that. It's not
trivial. You know, I think that that would be a really great chunk of labor for us. It would be
something we would do that we'd be proud of, something that would actually make the world a better
place. And that's just music. So we could go on and talk about other disciplines, you know,
news or art or whatever, where our style of work, IT systems could create new ways for people
to interact that actually give them value, that not just kind of hook them up and then I make
money off of you by advertising. So I hope I give it enough of a flavor there that was kind of long,
it was obviously very long-winded. But it's not that common to hear people think that way.
It's more common to think, hey, I can build a company. I can use all this latest Gizmo stuff,
you know, IT stuff. And people will be attracted and then I'll make money off of some way. I'll make
it with advertising or whatever. Done. That's great. And then if I'm AI, I'm going to take all that
data and I'm going to create super intelligence. I'll put that in there in the mix too and I'll
even make more money. I don't know what people have in mind, really. But you know, the naive
tale of all of that is breathtaking. And just a little bit of down to earth, hey, wait, isn't there
a market here? Hey, can't we get some money in the hands of sixteen-year-olds or doing cool stuff?
Hey, can't we rethink this whole equation of what the IT has been used for? I just don't hear
it enough. And so I'm maybe willing to sort of say naive things about it, but just to say,
a younger person, think about doing that. Create a company that creates a market that makes
plenty of other people. You can take your little commission. That's great. That's a wonderful
thing to aspire to. And if you're an academic, think about, hey, how could I actually create a
market with millions of people or hundreds of millions of people that actually works? You know,
that isn't attackable or it doesn't collapse at a heat. You know, how could I do that?
And is the core element of interest in there, the idea of a marketplace? You know, whether it's
two-sided or multi-sided, is that what is driving a lot of your interest? And I add on to that
a little bit. One of the things that is really interesting about your work and some of your
writings is that you often come back to this idea of planetary scale. And one of the best examples
we have of that is the internet. And we referenced that a little bit earlier, the bits flying around.
But you don't think of that as a marketplace necessarily. It's this undifferentiated
infrastructure that was made available that we figured out all these incredible things to do with.
So do you think this idea of a marketplace is kind of a next frontier in some way or
is that just an example of one of these planetary scale systems that you think is interesting?
Yeah, that's a great question. First of all, I don't necessarily love the word marketplace.
But I find that when I use that terminology, a lot of people argue with me. So I must be on to
something. Yeah, I must be on to something. So, you know, it's odd. If I talk about grading
and descent or learning or AI, the market starts to get, wait, even markets respond for all of these
social ills. These are the markets for respect. So I give a talk in an academic conference about a
year ago. It's just totally technical geeky kind of people wanting to see the latest equations.
At the end of it, I mentioned the word market. They said, well, markets are terrible,
aren't they? And I said, really? And he said, yeah, it's sort of, he said, it's responsible for
global warming. And, you know, so it's like, okay, we need to step back a moment here to get
a deep breath. You know, so markets were created by academics or by powerful people. It was created,
you know, somehow by human interactions, thousands of years ago. And it's like, you have a little
something, I have a little something, hey, we could trade, we both be happier. And so it's a kind of
an enforcement nature. It doesn't mean that it's like it solves all problems or that it's a good
force of nature or good or bad. It's just there. It is there. It's been under exploited in our field.
So, you know, the internet, no, I don't think it is a market, right? The internet was kind of
human attempt to have no scarcity, constant availability, you know, no limits, right? And that's not
real life, right? Real life is about limits and about scarcity and about trade-offs. I can't do
this because you're wanting to do this or I can't do this because I got limits on my time or I'm
like, you know, that's real life. The mature human being is able to manage these kind of, you know,
trade-offs. They can't do everything they want to do. And the internet was something about, no,
no trade-offs, folks. You give these much bits and bandwidth as you want. And let's just keep
working and working and working until that's true, right? And that's somehow just not real. And it
had to kind of eventually lead to some sort of, you know, effectively chaos. And there's a bit of
stage. We have a lot of social chaos right now driven by that way of thinking that it's all fine.
So markets are actually kind of more of a constraint, which is that, hey, you're in the game,
I'm in the game too. We keep all kind of what you want, but maybe we'll find a way that we're both
a little bit happy, right? So another way I like to say it is that you don't like markets. Well,
you know, suppose I'm trying to do a form of engineering, I'm trying to do a mechanical engineering.
You know, I know little physics and I know a little fluid flow or something. And now I'm trying
to create this new field where I build buildings and bridges or whatever. And I'm going to have
principles for that, you know, based on basic physics, all right? And now the question is, do I
should I use gravity or not in my new field? You know, well, I can say, well, gravity, sure,
I can use gravity as part of physics, right? I have to use it. And someone said, well, no,
but gravity is a terrible thing. What does gravity do? How many people die a year from gravity?
Well, you know, lots. People fall down and hurt themselves in all kinds of ways because of gravity.
Right? And so, you know, gravity should be avoided at all costs. It's really evil.
All right? So that's a stupid way to think, right? And the right thing way to think about it is
that gravity is just a force of nature. We can use it and we should. But we should also control it
and be aware of the consequences and all that. So same thing with markets. It's a force of nature.
You know, turning it off is a bad idea. So, but use it, but then be aware of what the consequences are.
And more of our markets, you know, gravity is kind of one thing. Maybe it's not a lot of physicists,
but markets aren't one thing. So there's matching markets. There's auctions. There's just all kinds
already in economics. As we go forward with learning systems invading into microeconomics,
you know, brand new kinds of markets go up to emerge. You know, so like, you know, second price
auction markets, that was a discovery just now, you know, in our lifetime. And there's just to be
all kinds of new mechanisms like that that need to be discovered to make these markets actually
safe and interesting and healthy and work at the scales we need to work at and all that. And that's
an emerging field. And so yeah, we're just saying markets and we're done. That solves a problem.
No, but markets as a way just to bring in more constraints into your problem, make it a little more
social and hint at all the challenges and then try to knock them off. Yeah, I'm very enamored
with that way of thinking. So no, the internet's gone market. The internet was just kind of a pipe.
That's fine. But I think we're going to be a much more mature feel when we start to at least have
a little bit of appreciation for the word market. You're when you when you in the example that you
gave with the the music company, one of the key themes there was this idea of empowerment.
But I think, you know, just kind of following along on this markets thread, you know,
we've also seen examples of, you know, markets. You know, and I'm thinking of, you know,
not to name a certain four-letter ride sharing company, but, you know, using their market power to,
you know, ultimately allegedly take advantage of, you know, gig economy workers.
I'm curious. I guess maybe the question, you know, there is, you know, do you think government
regulation is a kind of a necessary component of markets or do you believe that, you know,
something else? Oh, yeah, no, I totally believe that government regulation is needed.
Yeah, so I know enough economists to know too that most of them agree that there was a
thing we call the Chicago School where unregulated markets were going to solve all the
most problems. And that's just that's just not not true. Yeah, not, you know, empirically.
And I think as we develop these brand new kinds of markets that are operating scales kind of
beyond the human capacity faster than we ever could think or bigger than we could ever consume,
conceive of, that it's not going to be just the kind of working it out at the local level kind
of that humans will fight with each other. And if you cheated me, I'll come find you, you know,
well, it's not, it's so we need, we need, yeah, there's, we need many hierarchies of structures
that are starting from the local to the more global. And we're going to have to work out in tandem
as we develop these learning systems and these data-oriented systems that help us make decisions
that are in the world, whatever you want to call it, it's happening. And so I think taking
in a mature market perspective will help, but then working with lawyers, legal people, working
with social, just working with people who are public policy people and trying to figure out what are
the appropriate ways to regulate here so that we do the right thing. Economics also has a beautiful,
it's kind of a dour field, right? It has this kind of, hey, I think I'm doing the right thing by
putting in this mechanism, but the consequences of that are that, you know, incentivizes somebody
to come in and do something that breaks entirely what I do. Well, you know, economists are pretty
good at now thinking that through all the way to the end and sort of seem, well, okay, that didn't
work, but here's another way to do it. And I think, again, if we partner and we kind of work
with that style of thinking that it'll help us to understand what kind of ways to structure these
markets. Also, this field of mechanism design is very kind of, it's probably the field part of
economics closest to computer science where you start to get the constraints and the algorithms
of computer science. And it's not just open and open, it's a market and it works. It's no, that
gives you, that's like gravity, that gives you a lot of the force, the basic oomph there.
But on top of that, you got to put various, these kind of constraints, you got to run the auction
in this kind of way, you got to go up and down and so on and so forth, such that it'll actually kind
of give the socially desirable outcome that all of us aspire to. Now, if you add learning systems
on top of that, we're all kind of putting in our data and it's learning from us and we're learning
from them, it just becomes much more rich and complicated. And so, yeah, definitely, I'm
very much on the side of some regulation and it's kind of the right mix. If you try to do it all
top down, it's going to totally not work. The kind of free market people were right about that.
Think about another kind of market just to be kind, so you could help your think is, I don't think,
is the suppose that I'm trying to build an app that gets people to the airport as quickly as
possible. We already have apps kind of like that. So, it records some data and it figures out
that a certain path from here to A to B is like the fastest based on the data. That's great.
So, now it recommends, if I'm an A, if I don't want to get to B, it'll recommend a certain path to
me. And if only me is using the app than great or for a few people are using it fine, but what
if everyone in the city is using it? Now, it'll send everybody from A to B and creates congestion.
All right. There's an economic phenomenon. There's scarcity that's not being respected.
All right. So, at that point, you could say, well, okay, I screwed it up. It's my job to figure out
how to do the blow balancing. I shouldn't be sending everyone A to B. So, who do I send from A
through C to B instead and do the slower path? Well, that becomes hard to know, you know. Maybe,
I think I know you're a impatient kind of person. So, I'll send you down the fast route or you're
in a patient kind of person. You can see all the trouble I'm going to get into. Rather, at that point,
you got to sort of abandon the pure top down, you know, regulation oriented computer science person
and be the more open markets person. You say, well, I'm going to give it as an option to people. They
can pay a little bit more. Maybe to go down the street that's fast because they know they're in a
hurry today. And they're willing to part with a little of their money or they're today. Actually,
they're not subject to hurry. They'll save some money for the future. So, add some auction mechanism
in there and do it in a clever way. So, they don't actually have to run an auction as you're trying
to figure out how to get to the airport. But have an avatar running an auction for you. And now,
you can imagine that, you know, people go on the road that they're most, you know, that helps
some of the utility. They get there quickly enough for their purposes. So, now we've kind of created
economic style, you know, information flow kind of system that maybe some experience about us,
but also uses our in the moment kind of knowledge that we're looking for and creates a system that
overall would maybe make people happier. We wouldn't make only the rich get richer or create
congestion because we're doing it being stupid. Yeah, what was really interesting in that example for
me is that you layer on this idea that, you know, the future will have these kind of marketplaces
that you're describing and the marketplaces will have, you know, built-in, you know, learning systems
and intelligences. But the players as well will have, you know, learning systems in a form of agents
or whatever. If we layer that into your example, you know, even today, you can, you know, open up your
phone and it'll tell you, oh, it's time to leave to the, you know, to go to the airport because you
have a flight at, you know, whatever time. You know, those algorithms, I think are, you know,
based on, you know, kind of map style algorithms. But you can easily imagine, you know, these
interactions between the, you know, optimization that's happening in the market and the optimization
that's happening, you know, with your agent that's representing your interests and trying to
either, you know, save you time or gas money or whatever it is. And in the fields of economics
and, you know, game theory, there's all kinds of research into interacting systems and how they
behave and, you know, what is overall equilibrium, things like that. When I think about, you know,
kind of bringing it back to ML and AI, I've started to think about things like adversarial
relationships, which were studying. Are there other examples of, you know, where we're studying
these and interacting learning systems at this scale? Yeah, we're not studying enough. There
are a lot of people, there's a, there's a community called EC, economics and computation that
there's a conference is devoted to it. And it's sort of not in the central of, you know, a lot of
machine learning people don't know about it. And I'm even given the wrong actual, the, the
acronym is EC, but I think it's economics in computation or and computation. But anyway,
it's, it's, it's, it's, people who study really kind of algorithmic beats economics. And there's
not that much learning there, but there's, there's, there's some people, the, the few people
the world who do study those things are often found there. And, you know, you can, there's things
like what if I have many, many actions like in a classical game theoretic setting and there's
like two actions or 10 or there's not hundreds of thousands. But in our world, there's often
hundreds of thousands, all the treatments I could have for some, you know, medical condition
or all the paths I could take to the airport or all the restaurants I could go to and check
high, you know, et cetera, et cetera, all the books I could read. All right. So, so classical
game three doesn't have a lot of kind of 100,000 by 100,000, you know, or a million by million
game tables. If they had those, they would have realized there's no way I'm going to know the
numbers in that game table. All right. And so, that's where we come into the picture, which is
that we're telling you how from day to day get numbers like that. All right. And, but now we can
do things like, well, I can't explore all those numbers. I can't try every restaurant. I can't
try to be Patrick or, but, but you try it and you're my friend. All right. And so like recommendation
systems are explicitly about that is that as a community, we try a bunch of options. And then
somehow the algorithms figure out a way to make recommendations that would fill in entries in
the table, even though we never experienced them before. And also, there's kind of an exploration
exploitation idea in learning and statistics, which is really, really critical, which is, you know,
there's many options I have to try today, you know, things I could try to do. Some of them,
I try because they give me a reward, you know, I had a nice dinner and so on. Some of them,
I try because I want to explore and because maybe for the future, I want to do that instead. And,
and life is kind of a mixture of these things. And so good machine learning people are aware and
kind of no algorithms for trying to mix these things. It's not that common in other fields. A lot of
other fields are either pure explorers, pure, pure exploit. So you can now think about kind of
economic systems where, you know, I'm trying to get to the airport, but, you know, maybe I'm like in
Italy and I'm kind of just happy to also see this countryside a little bit, you know. I'm more
in an explorer mode. And so since I'm going to explore me, you know, maybe the system, you know,
the avatar, whatever, we'll kind of know that. And it'll kind of, you know, give me a different
experience than I might otherwise had. It's not just trying to optimize in a really dumb way.
You know, or I'm going to the shopping mall, right? And nowadays there aren't really many shopping
malls. But, you know, you can imagine that or I go to a commerce site. Sometimes I really just
want to go there and buy two paces from what I want. And I want just very little, you know,
in my way between me and the acquisition, right? But other times I go there and I want to learn
what's the coolest thing out there. I want to have a social interaction. I want to sort of
entertain and so on and so forth. And so if our virtual world, you know, our avatar driven virtual
world was a little bit more like that. That it recognized that now you're an explorer,
mowing, now you're an exploit mode. And then, you know, structure your interactions and structure
the environment around you would reflect all that. You know, that would be healthy. And it wouldn't,
it wouldn't need to know all the details about my life to do that. It wouldn't be in basic.
It would really more be, as you said earlier, like the word empowered. It would allow me to sort
of give a little bit of information such that it was structured the environment in a way that I
would find more appropriate for my current needs. I think that the IT Silicon Valley world
was very too much top-down. They thought they could build the system and it would be perfect
and it would know everything about you. And if it didn't know enough about you,
it would look even more into your browsing history. And it would bring together all the information
and so much so that it would know what you would want and it would anticipate your every need.
And that style of thinking is, you know, God damn it, it's still too much there. You know,
they want this little secretary sitting next to you that no anticipates your every need. That's a
dream of AI. Well, I don't dream of having that secretary myself at all. You know,
I dream of really having a few aspects of my state kind of taken respected and my utilities
and my preferences. And I want you to take some load off of me, but I don't want to anticipate
my every need because you cannot. And the idea that a company would be able to do that is both
frightening and unrealistic. And so, yeah, this kind of idea back off from that, folks,
creates something more like a little bit of a market where I go into a market here in
Italy, you know, it's people are trying to sell things to me, but they're not like they know
me that much. They're just giving me opportunities. And so our own world, I think, is
more like that. And on that is that a statement about, you know, first and foremost about kind of
the centralization of data and or the centralization of, you know, intelligence or
or is it about, you know, you just you don't have any interest in the, you know, technology
being available to kind of enhance your life in that way.
Hey, you're that's a great question. You're heading in a direction I have less to say about,
but I'm very, very important. Who knows who has the data and who has the power because they have
that. And those are critical issues. Because I'm here and you say you'd love for this thing to,
you know, get you on the scenic route in Italy and, you know, you, you know, serendipitously maybe,
oh, you know, you're passing by this amazing thing. If you stop for 15 minutes, you'd have the time
of your life. And kind of hinting at, you know, maybe more of the misgivings are the way that we're
currently creating those experiences. Yeah, no, I don't feel empowered by such a system. I feel
bothered by such a system. And so I need to feel empowered. And there is a difference. And so this
word power does matter to me. You know, so whether it's centralized or whatever, if you use my data,
then that's okay with me, but if it's some sense, you use it and I get value out of your using it.
So if you pay me in some sense for my data. So in particular, you know, a travel agent is a person
who makes travel plans for lots of people. And they get better and better and better over the years,
right? So when I walk into that travel agent, they're just really good at it. They know how to get
me from point A to point me in a great way. Well, why? Because they got you to that point, you know,
they had experience in the past. So all your data is being used to help me. And are you unhappy about
that? Well, no, that's what a travel agent does. They kind of take that data. And so a system that
does that that kind of, you know, somewhere, some partially, you know, anonymizes me, but that builds
up experience dealing with people like me. And then I kind of know what I'm getting. You know,
this travel agent doesn't need to know everything, but they they took away enough to help somebody
else. I'm good with that. The medical system, you treat me, it works for me. I want it to be
well for you tomorrow, right? I don't want to protect that data. So, you know, I do want data to
flow. And I do want it to quote unquote, be centralized. But I don't want it to be used as an
advertising model that you have a lot of data about me. Therefore, you can tell other people the
advertisers how to come find me, right? That doesn't empower me to help me help you. But for humans to
help each other via the data flows. And for a company to help provide that and then even take
a bit of a cut, that's all that's more more in my that's more my comfort zone. So I would yeah,
definitely not a, you know, all on or all off here, you know, it's always in the middle. It's
know that it's not that there should be no, you know, data collections and centralization,
because that, you know, prevents you from actually having nice flows that are helpful to people.
You know, but, but also not just you can take my data willingly. You know, it's got to be kind of
a valuation of data. There's got to be that you pay me in some sense for data. And that I'm kind
of okay with that equation. So I go into your system. So if I go to a city and I'm, it's a restaurant
application is trying to give me recommendations of where to go. You know, if I'm in a foreign
city and I don't speak the language and it's seven o'clock and I'm hungry, I really would like
something really, really good that knows enough about me and the environment and all that,
they can really put me in a good place to eat that it's not, you know, weird or scary or whatever.
And I'm willing to give up a little bit of privacy for that about my past or about where I am at
all, but not too much, right? And there needs to be a way to find that, you know, and so I think
that's again, somewhat economic here. There's a tradeoff being implemented there. There's a trade
off between my privacy and the value I will get out of being, you know, you know, being helped with
my decision that was otherwise extremely, extremely hard. The travel agent example is a really
interesting one to me. I'm guessing that probably the vast, vast majority of our listening
audience has never used a travel agent. And, you know, probably only those of us who have can
appreciate what a good travel agent really brings to the table. And it makes me think that we think
about this idea of, you know, we think about AI in the context of this digital divide and,
you know, there will be, you know, communities that will be left behind because they don't have
ready access to, you know, AI technology. But the travel agent example makes me think that,
in a lot of ways, it's like a human divide, in a sense, in that that we need to worry about. And
that the, you know, the knowledge of, you know, humans is going to be, you know, is going to be
commoditized into these computational systems like AI's. And, you know, only the select few will
have access to, you know, actual humans who know things and have experiences and can,
can help them in, you know, whatever the endeavor is. Travel agent is a great example of that.
You know, it gets really scary if it's, you know, in medicine, for example, where, you know,
the masses are being treated by kind of the commoditized robot doctors, but, you know,
only the select few can actually speak to a human doctor with real experience. Do you, do you see
that as a direction? Do you think economics plays into that? Is that something you worry about?
Yeah, those are, I do worry about all of that. I think it's those are very critical problems.
Again, it's not enough just for someone like me to worry about it. It's got to be a joint effort
of lots, lots of people, you know, but indeed bringing in all the right people and making sure
there's a full, throated, diverse collection of people, you know, backgrounds and interests and
all that, associate with the role of these things is so important, critically important.
And so, you know, maybe a little bit on the optimism side, a lot of the things that I think
are interesting about my own life are kind of contextual and local. And the knowledge that's
available there is not something that Google's going to have. Most of the things about my life
that are interesting and all the Google doesn't know anything even to this day about, you know, my
searching browsing pattern is pretty limited and uninteresting. And I click on all kinds of junk.
I clicked on something the other day about, you know, the Queen of England or whatever.
It's just because I just was lazy and I just clicked on this. I know it's just in that whatsoever.
And, you know, there's tons of really noisy messy data in places like that that is kind of
irrelevant within, you know, 30 microseconds, not to mention two years. All right, so most of us
have a little more local environment around us that we help to construct and we participate in
a little more like a village rather than a, and by making and having that not being excluded
from that and having that be, you know, a healthy, good place, I'm a little less worried about
that there's going to be extreme stratification of, you know, this kind of technology.
Also AI for the most clear, this is data analysis, really. It's not magic.
These are ideas that are totally open and available to, you know, are on the archive.
They're simple algorithms. There is no mystery. People all over the world know what grading
is sent is and so and so forth. So moreover, computers are pretty much a commodity nowadays.
And the data, again, it's very contextual. The data relevant for some situation in Brazil is not
the data that's relevant for, you know, Palo Alto. And so it's not the Palo Alto bit of going to take
over because they have all the, you know, the goods. And then the people trained to solve the
problems are all local too. So I still think our local community building and our cultures and
all that are going to be, you know, critically important as we go forward. But there shouldn't be
kind of, you know, fiefdoms and, you know, enclaves, you know, there should be a let, you know,
and so it's going to require, you know, all the right kind of people to be involved in the construction
of as we build. So the medical one is a good example, you know, COVID has definitely decimated
minority communities more than it has decimated, you know, rich and white communities.
And this is a great example of that, hey, shouldn't that be like, oh, you know, why should there be
a racial discrepancy there? You know, it's a, it's a goddamn virus. Well, there is because that
reflects all of our ways of our systems have been built and have been built at Hawk and have built
without thinking about that. And those have got to be knocked down and broke and thought through
and make sure that those kind of things are, you know, mitigated and don't happen.
Yeah, so very, very important issues. And I just think mostly it's less about, you know,
those of us who think about the mathematics and the systems kind of doing it all right, it's,
but, but ensure that all the right people are in the room when the, when the systems get,
get built and when, and then it's transparent all the way through. There's never kind of a black
box that the society can't look at. So we've been kind of going with the flow of this conversation
and it's been wonderful. And I do want to kind of touch on a ML specific question, but even before
we get to that, one of the things that is, you know, just very clear and chatting with you is that,
you know, you have tons of ideas and you're currently exploring, you know, kind of this intersection
of economics and, and machine learning and marketplaces and, you know, you've, again, we've,
you've worked in biology and other fields. I'm just curious, you know, and getting a little meta
here, your, you know, process or philosophy and kind of wrangling these ideas and turning them
into, you know, interesting or even award-winning research, you know, or economic endeavors.
Yeah, thanks for asking. Let me just sort of say to me, that's a question that's more about talking
about younger researchers, how they could kind of get it in this field. Really, that's what comes
to me because I don't think I have any major secrets myself. I wouldn't look at my own career or
my own way of approaching things and say, wow, there's, I figured it out. Well, I didn't, you know,
and so part of it is I've been doing it for a long time. But, you know, secondly, I think that,
that most of the challenge is if you start to realize what a real challenge is, one that
will make a difference, that impacts or at least touches on issues that people care about,
that, you know, is worth kind of a two or three years of your time. Those are the kind of ones I
go after. If it's going to be like a month of my time, I'm not particularly interested in it,
and if it's going to be hopeless, you know, like, you know, Fermat's last equations, I just
know either, right? So I've kind of find these ones at two or three years of my time. So I get up
every morning and I make a little progress on it. And I just, especially for young people, just
sort of each one of you is smart enough to work in this field, each one of you knows enough. And so,
you know, but make sure you pick a problem. That is kind of meaty and it feels like it's not obvious
and it's not what everybody else is working on. It's kind of got your own flavor to it.
And it feels like after two or three years, you should be able to make some progress on it.
And then just keep getting up and hacking at it every day. And if you get a little frustrated,
pull back for a while. But that said, every day, I like to say that half of my day is devoted to
just kind of exploration. I read books on stuff. I think about, you know, I look at whether people
are doing it or, you know, I just learn about something brand new that I've not known about before.
Half of my day, if I can, this is a good days. And then half of my day is devoted to this.
Let's keep moving some projects along. Let's keep kind of doing where I was doing.
And then if it's not moving along, you know, I'll, you know, I'll kind of refocus. But,
but those timescales are really important to me. Kind of, you know, the main one is kind of my
overall life. Have I been thinking through all the things I kind of want to think through?
What matters? Do I know enough about X, Y and Z, you know? So, and often that is really
literally getting out undergrad. So, you know, mechanics and game theory, mechanism design.
Absolutely. Because it's helping me to think about new research directions.
Well, the way I do that is I go find a really good senior or junior level textbook.
And I read it like a novel because I just find it really fascinating. Wow. These people thought
this all this stuff. Moreover, I kind of already know enough math that I can kind of just read
it without having a lot of struggle. Like, even the undergrad would have struggled. I don't have
to struggle. It's so fun. And then I do that a little bit all the time. And over time, that's just
kind of, you know, really helped and build up and give me a bit of a perspective. You know, but I
don't feel like I'm necessarily a thought leader that, you know, I think that, you know, I think
that partly that has to do with the era you live in. And maybe we're arriving at the era now
where thought leaders will emerge. That kind of starts to become consequential. Our field is
mattering enough now. And so that we will be kind of burned by doing the wrong thing. And we'll
also kind of learn by doing the right thing. And then maybe after that, your experience will kind
of boost you the level thought leader. But we don't have a lot. Our image she already
feel has not been very consequential. It's really been in this era of just G Wiz kind of, you know,
stuff. And behind the scenes, people have used it to build kind of infrastructure for things like,
you know, Amazon or Google. And that's all great. And some of those people maybe have, you know,
gotten real perspective. But often it's very, very technical and very, very buried. And our field
hasn't kind of emerged like some other fields where they were really having consequences for the
human life. So I'm kind of hoping the younger people will realize that this is what's happening
that our field is going to have major consequences. So educate yourself broadly, spend time every day,
learn a lot of things, and learn how to talk to the outside world, not just yourselves. So
so I'm not sure answer your question, but I hope Antler is a great answer to that question.
I think the the way you structure your time around a thoughtful balance of explore and exploit
is an interesting answer to that question. And so to kind of close things out, you are
you know, very well known for kind of the popularization of a bunch of, you know, techniques
in the machine learning community, you know, Bayesian networks, variational methods, approximate
inference, expectation, maximization. Any thoughts on kind of the, you know, technical, direction
or elements of, you know, the research or, you know, where you see things going kind of at this,
you know, the intersection of machine learning computers and statistics.
Yeah, I know I have lots of thoughts about that kind of thing. If the, especially younger people
want to learn more about my work and thoughts about that, I have there's talks on the web that
you can find. And I think just to say briefly, a lot of my work has had to do with optimization,
kind of what's the best way to do something and even kind of lately, kind of what's the optimal
way to optimize. And so this word variational has had a real impact on my career, my life and my
thinking. Variational just means you take a problem and you turn it into an optimization problem.
All right. And having done that, you can often get new perspective on ways to kind of tweak that
optimization a little bit and solve a slightly different problem and get inside of your original
problem. And so variational methods of all kinds are still kind of very part of my, my way of
thinking. Optimization also has to do with change, it has to do with movement, it has to do with
dynamics. So a lot of my work has to do with dynamical systems, differential equations, partial
neutral equations, stochastic differential equations, how fast they converge, how well they do
in high dimensional spaces. And then with this economics kind of a perspective that is driving me a
lot now, the problem is now not just to go down downhill and find at the minimum of a surface,
is often to find an equilibrium among multiple agents. So how does each agent kind of move towards
equilibrium? So the classical equilibrium game theory, you know, limited perspective, you know,
Nash and Stacklberg and all, that's just kind of, how do you get there? It, you know, was never
really talked about. Well, the whole question is, how do you get there? And how does data inform
how do you get there? And even if there's multiple people interacting in a complex world,
you may never get there. It's more about how do you move? And so lots and lots of interesting things
have to do with stochastic dynamics and the context of games and our perspective on high-dimensional
optimization and so on so forth. So I just have a lot of fun with all the huge mathematical challenges
there. You know, a lot of them are mathematical dynamics and dynamical systems, but then always
behind the scenes is always about inference, about how did you sample things from the real world?
What can you say about the real world based on what you got after your algorithm runs?
What's that tell you about the real world? What's your answer to be? And all these things. So
statistics is kind of in some ways my home field where my heart is. It is the field where I think
the biggest challenges are about. You're trying to say it's not the real world based on something
partial. And that continues to be I think the hardest and most worth worthy field for many of us.
Awesome. Well, Michael, thank you so much for taking the time to share a bit about
what you're thinking about nowadays with us. It was wonderful speaking with you.
It was a real pleasure to talk to you too. Great questions and a lot of a fun hour for me too.
Thank you very much. Thank you.